pretty much to stay within the field of demography and so, or population kinds of things.
And pretty well, and got, oh by the way, we were part of a national study of farm population trends.
You know, how many people are on farms and what they were doing, that kind of stuff, and how that was declining and all that, so got into that in a big way, and so that led to other things.
Or worked out fine as far as I'm concerned.
You joined the faculty in 1949 and served for how many years?
That's correct.
When did you retire?
1984.
Thirty-five years.
Uh-huh.
General, describe generally the students when you began.
And the students in your latter years, how, what, contrast those and compare them?
I would compare them this way.
The big change was the introduction of women.
That was really the big change.
I was one of those, even though I was an OLAG, I was always in favor of women being at A&M.
And I just saw a tremendous, of course I may have been biased by that to some degree, but I was simply very pleased with what really happened.
With the introduction of women, there was just a lot of, it's hard to kind of put your finger on.
I would say this, that the women, I think, brought out more of the good side of the males.
Not only behaviorally, but as students.
I really think that the first group of women we had in, I think, were really committed to saying, we're going to show these guys.
And they did.
And in our department, for example, we had by then established a little awards kind of a thing.
We chose the outstanding student of the year.
And I remember the first three years that the women were here, women won that award each year.
And you know the boys just, I think it just really did wonders for them too.
And I think the girls that we got in here first were really dedicated.
Were they going to show these guys?
They kept us out here for so long.
It just gave the university a boost I think academically, culturally, and just every way that you could put it.
I'd say this, that in the day when I was, for example, an undergraduate, I feel like that, of course I was among the students, the old ags were kind of crude kind of guys.
They would use, you know, not really foul language, you know.
I just saw a big transformation I think, of which I'm really, really pleased with.
In the early 60s, I was part of the Aspirations Committee study and so forth.
Were you involved in some of that effort that led to the recommendations of Co-education and Volunteer Corps and so forth?
No, not really in that sense.
But I do remember something that happened, and that is that
A little bit before then, after Mr. Gabbard retired, Ty Tim was my department head.
Oh yeah, we won't talk about him.
And he was a very, very good person.
He was just great in a sense.
Anyway, and he was pretty close to Mr. Rudder.
And I think Rudder really asked him about, and as I recall, and I don't know if this is exactly right,
Ty was asked if we could do a study, somehow, of students of, how shall I say it, their view of how they viewed Texas A&M as a school.
And Ty, as I recall, asked me to do that.
And I wanted to do it except in the meantime I was tied up with a whole lot of other things with experimentation.
And so we had a guy here by the name of Harold Brown, C. Harold Brown, and Barton Nelson.
And I think they conducted this study.
And as I recall, and this is all secondhand now, they found that typically the East Texas students, we didn't rate worth a darn with them for several reasons, among being all military and all that sort of stuff.
And I really felt, you know, personally that Barton really kind of suffered from that a little bit, that he, some other Mr. Rudder, you know, I don't know, you know, didn't take that very well.
Although it must have impressed him, among other things, of course.
And I've heard other things being said.
Anyway.
Was that, as far as you know, was that study funded by the experiment station?
Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no.
That was, I think, Mr. Rudder's.
Okay.
No, no.
Harold Brown lived across the street from us at that time.
Oh, he did, yeah, yeah, yeah, C. Harold.
And among the results that I remember, they found a correlation between the students with high grades and a disinterest in going to an all-male or an all-female school.
I think that is correct.
They found that the students thought that A&M had high standards,
But they did not know that A&M offered anything other than agriculture and engineering and veterinary medicine.
And one that I have used many times as a summary, they asked them to generalize, what do you think about Baylor?
What do you think about Texas Tech?
And one of the boys wrote as his summary about A&M.
No girls, no fraternities, no fun, no way.
Yeah, it could be.
So part of our, when we recommended that women be admitted and the Corps be volunteer, one of our arguments was if we are going to be attractive,
To the brightest students, we're going to have to make some modifications.
Now, let's see, those were both your colleagues, weren't they, Barden and?
Oh, yes, oh, yes, yes, you bet.
Matter of fact, I was responsible for Barden coming here because I came here in 49, and Barden and I were grad students at LSU at that time.
Oh.
And so after I was here that first year,
We were given permission, however it was, to add a faculty member.
And again, in those days, we didn't write a bunch of letters and all that, just say, hey, who do you know?
So I recommended Barton, and Barton came here and got the job.
As you began, about how many majors were there in rural sociology?
Do you remember how big they were?
I really don't.
We had a sizable number.
But as I began in those years, I just don't know.
I just don't know.
Well, let's go back to Ty Tim.
Make believe I had never met him.
Describe him.
Ty was a very, I think, able department head.
One of the most able that I've been around among that group anyway.
Interesting enough,
When Mr. Gabbard was going to retire, see I was a member of that department at that time, and I was very close with the ag economists.
And the ag economists did not want to have Ty as the department head because Ty was an extension person.
And you know, they thought this guy is not a researcher, all that kind of stuff, and so we don't want him.
But anyway, he got the job.
Anyway.
And Ty, I think, was a very, very good administrator.
And they sort of I think felt, Ty was, his degree was a DPA, I believe it was Doctor of Public Administration, something like that.
They felt like that was sort of below the level of what they wanted anyway.
in a very short time, I think, convinced people he was really, he had it.
And he did.
He was excellent politically and otherwise.
He was just very, very good.
That's all I can say.
And he was very, always prepared.
And he made, since we had the two disciplines, he, as
When Professor Russell got to be older, he said, okay, you know, Dr. Dan, you finish out your years, but Bob's going to be the chairman of that group now.
And so I used to go to him, with him.
meetings with the dean of agriculture and people like that.
And he was always prepared.
He always had a plan A, a plan B, and he just, the minute we would walk in, the two of us, to discuss something dealing with, let's say, the rural society part of it, or maybe the department, he was the kind of guy who could just spot how the director or whoever it was felt that day.
Now, he's always struck me from a distance, way over in the history department, as one of the most potent department heads in agriculture.
Yeah, I think so.
Anyway, and he always had plant A and plant A. So we walk in and the dean wasn't feeling just right that day or something.
He would immediately go, you know, he'd jump that and he'd go the southern direction.
But yes, he was.
I also felt that, honestly, that many of the department heads in agriculture
He wasn't the most popular with them.
partly because again he didn't have a Ph.D.
you know, he was one of these other guys.
And I think partly because he was gaining so much favor with the deans and whoever ran the College of Agriculture at that time.
And I think they saw him as kind of a slick politician type rather than a guy who keeps the reins on the department members and stuff like that.
But Ty was very, very good.
From your point of view, who were the other key department heads in the College of Agriculture?
At that time?
Mm-hmm.
John Quisenberry, poultry science.
He was rather influential.
What about that animal science fellow from Orange named Butler?
I don't know, at that time he wasn't there.
Oh, O.D.
wasn't there?
But I don't think he was there at that point.
Oh, okay.
He came later.
I believe D.W.
Williams was the head of department.
Okay.
Which I didn't know too much about.
All right, move on forward then into the 60s and 70s.
Who were the... Well, one of them was Wayne Hall.
I think he was department head.
And he was, I think, very, very good, very good administrator, well liked all that sort of stuff.
He later became dean of the graduate college.
I'm sure O.D.
was one of those who had a lot of influence.
All right, let's move to the 60s with Mr. Rudder here.
Did you ever work with Mr. Rudder?
Did you form an opinion of him?
I'm going to say, let me go back before then.
When he got appointed I was one of those who felt like, no, this guy is a military man, he has nothing, sure he's a good administrator at the level that he was at, but he's just not going to be on the campus to do that job.
Maybe Ty had something to do with it, I don't know.
But they were, he and Ty were very good friends.
They may have been classmates, I'm not sure.
But he wasn't here very long before it began to change my opinion.
And I thought just a lot of him.
And as the years progressed, my evaluation went up and up.
And particularly when he brought the women in.
You know, there was just a little icing on the cake.
You've seen the 20-minute tape that they have on the history of College Station, okay.
If you remember, Ms.
Rudder makes a comment about the football and that kind of thing, how that fit in.
Anyway, yeah.
But anyway, no, I really thought it was quite good.
Like I offer over and over in speeches the idea that only Earl Rudder could have politically made those changes.
I believe that's right.
Because Dr. Morgan, I believe it was, had some of the same ideas, but he didn't survive.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
During those years, as you continued your work, as you look back now on those 35 years on the faculty, what are you most proud of personally?
What are your proudest accomplishments?
Well, you're talking about for me personally?
Well, I guess the thing I'm most proud of is that I was in the very first group that received the
Distinguished Teaching Awards, that group.
That's probably the highlight.
The first year?
The very first year.
That's marvelous.
There was Wayne Hall and somebody else was in that group, I forget.
And then the second thing was that in 82, I guess it was, I got the same award for research.
Also been very proud of the fact that
I still have a pretty good close relationship with a number of former students.
You know, not totally, as I get older that changed, but that's another thing I'm very proud of.
And I'm proud of the kids that I had in class that I knew fairly well, how well they have done.
I have only very happy thoughts about the whole thing.
It has just been marvelous from beginning to end.
And I'm proud of the fact that I had the freedom to, well I don't know, somewhere along the line it seemed to me I was pretty much given free reign to say go ahead and do what you want to do, more or less.
And that the administrators, whoever they might have been, whether it was Maxwell or whoever it was, got encouraged from everybody.
And this is kind of bragging, I guess, but I have over 200 publications that I'm very, very proud of.
And they're in all kinds of popular magazines and so forth.
And they're in some of the better known academic things.
Of which of those publications are you most proud?
Well, if you want to talk about the one I like the best, it's the one that I did, I'm not, you know, the one I like the best that I've done was the one that I did in American Demographics.
It was written in, I'm not sure what year now, but it was about the time that, what's her name, was running for, was going to be the vice presidential candidate, Lady.
You know, I'm talking about the United States.
The Kansas Senators.
Yeah, yeah, anyway.
Anyway, yeah.
I wrote it very well accepted and it just got really international press from the fact that
I was saying at that time, of course it's written from a particular viewpoint, saying hey, better watch out for these women.
They're going to gain power and so forth and so forth.
And it's kind of, it's really a very cute piece about the gaining power, political power of women eventually, and how it has progressed and
and with supporting data about that kind of stuff and why this is so and all that kind of stuff.
I guess that's one of our most popular, it's by far the most popular.
All right, now I know of your, some of your fine work about the Czech population in Texas.
Did they always respect what you were doing or did some of them want to be restrictive about sharing their information with you?
No, they were very open, very open, always.
They were good and proud of?
Oh yes, yes, I have no, now let me say, it could be that after I left talking to somebody they probably said, you know, that old boy, you know, but I know I really had a tremendously fine relationship with them.
I never heard anything but positive.
They have just been great, and life has just been so good it just couldn't be any better.
And Texas A&M has got a lot to do with it.
And I think that Czech background got a lot to do with just, and I would say this, that nothing was ever planned.
It just unfolded, and particular points in my life of just certain decisions were made for some, whatever reason, I don't know, but it just turned out fine.
Right.
Over these 35, now 45 or so years,
What key decisions did A&M make that now look to be good?
One was the admission of women.
What are some other key decisions that you can think of made in agriculture and or in general about A&M?
What were the big steps?
The big steps for me I think were again, you mentioned the women, but I think become a Sea Grant, become a
Well, we were at a land grant.
What's the third one?
You know, that part of it.
Those are really the big steps, I think.
And I'm just as proud as I can be of things that have happened.
Can you think of any mistakes that we made?
Not really.
I don't know if we call them mistakes, but among the people that I've served under, I just regarded Jack Williams as the tops.
And if you want to talk about a mistake,
I felt like that, and I don't know anything about the circumstances, after all, I'm not in the inner circle, but I just really felt like that Jack kind of got not too good a treatment.
If you'd call that a mistake, I don't know, but I just thought he was just terrific, just terrific, just terrific.
I agree with you on both points.
Why do you feel so positive about him?
What do you think were his skills and talents?
I think in point of time if I'd track and say what's happened that really did, made A&M great, and I do think it's great, I really do.
And I know it's great.
Earl Rudder brought it to a certain level.
I may be wrong, but my evaluation of Rudder is I really feel like he may have taken it about as far as he could have, maybe not.
But Jack was the big thing that really hit here, that really did it.
And he just had such leadership skills and of course I'm just a little guy on the sideline, tuned in as little as I could by talking to people who might know something, might not, they might even be giving me false information.
I just had the impression that he was the guy that really made this place.
really what it is today.
I mean there have been people who succeeded him and they've done great things but he's been the guy.
I think those were the two.
And my theme is only they could have done what they did.
If you reverse them, neither one of them succeeds.
Probably not.
Because Williams would have had political trouble with co-education because he wasn't a Texan and all that.
Mr. Rutter would have had academic trouble trying to do what Williams did.
So God or somebody was kind to us.
They sure were.
Down in agriculture at the college level, who would you give key credit to?
I'd have to think about, well, one I would have to give key credit to is R.D.
Lewis.
He was the director of the experiment station.
And I think he...
even though he wasn't the dean.
Another one I would give credit to, although I don't know just how much influence he had, was Gus Watkins.
He was really good in his day for what he was, but I never did understand the
division of power among those in agriculture.
Another guy that I give great credit to was John Hutchison, Director of the Extension Service.
Individually I guess those would be probably the big names, to me I guess, but R.D.
Lewis and John Hutchison and
Gus Watkins, I guess.
If I thought about that long and hard, I might come up with something different.
In rural sociology, we were, correct me if I'm wrong, when you joined the department, we were an average program, I presume.
Maybe below average.
How good did we become?
How competitive did we become?
Well that's kind of difficult to, you have to kind of separate these things out a little bit because we became, right now, in my opinion, we are quite good.
We're among the, you know, the top, I don't know, maybe 20 or 30 or something like that, yes.
And now by measuring that, however, I would have to measure that basically by the quality of the faculty, which is really measured by how big a research grant and how big a name they have.
And we have some really big names here.
I mean, they're really something, some of these people.
We have about three or four, I guess, that really are somebodies in the sociological world, whatever that means.
They're just idiots out there.
And also I might say that I've been retired for so long, I don't really know what's going on in the world in the sociology field.
But I think that I would put it this way.
The big step, really, some of the big steps that came along was when we finally got the change from the College of Agriculture to the liberal arts.
I think that was the big step again.
And the fact that simultaneously at that time they permitted us to offer the Ph.D.
degree and that kind of thing.
Who deserves particular credit for that Ph.D., do you know?
I think I do, and I guess I'm at liberty to kind of say.
Several people, one of them was Wayne Hall.
He was dean of the graduate college, but he, you know, I'll go back and say this.
I lost some friends in agriculture who were my big, big buddies.
But I think once we got transferred over there, those guys lost me as a friend.
I mean I lost them as a friend.
And they're very, they guard their own territory very, very well.
And that's one of my, I'd say, feelings about agriculture.
They're a very closely knit group and always have been in Extension Service.
But anyway, there were certain key people, I'm trying to think of the
gentleman's name that was the, I guess he had the title of provost, although that name probably wasn't at that time.
What was his name?
Same time that Hall was in the graduate college, this guy was.
All right, now, when I went to work for Hall, he had, in the late 60s, he had both titles.
He was vice president of academic affairs and dean of the graduate school.
Well, he had a lot to do with it, but the guy that followed him,
And Horace Byers?
That's it, that's it, that's it.
He was, he was, he was, I just, my head is off to him.
Because he really, really did, I think, wonders for us.
And then Calhoun followed him as the vice president.
Well, I didn't know Calhoun that well, but, you know, there were little bitty battle lines drawn, you know.
And I remember that, well, people in College of Agriculture were very, very unhappy with us moving out.
Very unhappy.
Y'all had sold out.
Yeah, that's right.
And I remember some little things that took place.
For example, when it came to the question of
whether or not we should have a PhD program.
We were still in the College of Agriculture.
Dr. Barris asked me to go with him to appear before the coordinating board to try to make our case.
And at that time the dean of agriculture, as I recall, I'm not sure if it was straight, pretty well let me know that I was overstepping my bounds, that somebody else should do that.
And I also got the, well anyway, Dr. Byers, in effect, I think he really kind of stepped in and said, hey, you know, I'm running this shop and you're the one that's going to go.
So, and that was, you know, but I respect Byers for that.
He really, anyway, really, right, but the two big guys I think were Hall and then Byers.
Now when you all moved over to liberal arts, were you fairly treated?
Oh yes, very good.
And Maxwell was the dean then?
That's correct.
I was appointed the, not the department head, but the acting head.
And Maxwell treated us very, very well.
Now one other thing that happened, however, simultaneously, there were just one or two courses in anthropology taught by different units, professors on their own.
And when we made this change,
whoever the powers that be, said there will be a Department of Sociology and Anthropology.
And having sort of been under the thumb of ag-economics, and I take nothing away from Ty now, I'm just saying, we were the second-class citizens in India.
And I just felt like that we didn't want that.
So when we got over there, one of the first things I did, I got to Kevin Maxwell, I said,
We want to do everything we can for anthropology.
I'm in sociology.
I've been in other situations.
I would like us to find somebody who can really run the anthropology part of the program.
And boy, was I fortunate.
We find Vaughn Bryant.
And I'm telling you, that guy, he is something.
How did you find him?
How did you locate him?
It was an interesting kind of a thing.
I had kind of felt around here and there.
SMU had a good program in anthropology.
The University of Texas had a good program.
And I sort of talked to some of those guys.
Anyway, he was at Washington State I do believe at the time.
And his name kind of surfaced and I've got a, I've got a.